paper/paper.md, before:

---
title: "THz Image Explorer - An Interactive Cross-Platform Open-Source THz Image Analysis Tool"
tags:
  - THz
  - Rust
  - Imaging
  - Data Analysis
authors:
  - name: Linus Leo Stöckli
    orcid: 0000-0002-7916-2592
    corresponding: true
    affiliation: "1"
  - name: Arnaud Demion
    orcid: 0009-0002-6920-475X
    affiliation: "2"
  - name: Nicolas Thomas
    orcid: 0000-0002-0146-0071
    affiliation: "1"
affiliations:
  - name: Space Research & Planetary Sciences Division, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland
    index: 1
    ror: 02k7v4d05
  - name: University of Applied Sciences and Arts Western Switzerland Valais, HES-SO Valais-Wallis, Sion, Switzerland
    index: 2
    ror: 03r5zec51
date: 3 July 2025
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Introduction

THz time-domain spectroscopy (TDS) is a fast-growing field with applications to perform non-destructive studies of
material properties [@neu_tutorial_2018].
The pulses can either be measured after passing through (transmission spectrum) or after being reflected (reflection
spectrum) by a sample and are recorded in the time domain. Through Fourier analysis (FFT), we can investigate the
complex refractive index and absorption coefficient of the sample.
By placing either the sample or the optical setup on a moving stage the sample can be imaged in 2D.

![THz Image Explorer icon.\label{fig:icon}](icon.png){#id .class width=20%}

We developed an interactive graphical user interface (GUI), written
in [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org) [@matsakis2014rust], to aid
investigating acquired 2D scans. The
application implements the dotTHz standard [@lee_dotthz_2023] and is platform independent and open-source, thus making
it easier to maintain and increasing its reach.

![THz Image Explorer screenshot.\label{fig:screenshot}](screenshot.png)

# Statement of need

Interactive analysis tools for THz spectroscopy are essential to browse through images and analyse different regions of
interest efficiently.
Commercial suppliers provide closed-source analysis tools (e.g. [Menlo Systems](https://www.menlosystems.com)) where the
code cannot be adapted by the user, which is often essential in research environments and extends the maintainability of
the code.
Solutions published by the scientific community are not available on all platforms, are only applicable on single pixel
measurements and/or not focused on an interactive workflow [@peretti_thz-tds_2019; @loaiza_thztools_2024].
With this application, we provide a high-performance solution written in Rust, that allows an interactive analysis of 2D THz
scans with multiple filters and a 3D viewer.
This work is open-source and pre-built bundles are available for Linux, macOS and Windows, thus available to the
entire scientific community.

# Structure

The application is multithreaded with two main threads:

- GUI thread
- Data thread

The GUI uses [egui](https://www.egui.rs), an immediate-mode GUI library for rust.

The structure of the software architecture is shown in figure \ref{fig:software-architecture}.

![Software Architecture.\label{fig:software-architecture}](thz-image-explorer.drawio.png){width=80% .center}

# Usage

A sample scan (of a resolution target) is available in the `sample_data` directory. The measurement has been acquired
using the COCoNuT setup [@coconut_2025].

## Optical Properties Calculation

The refractive index $n$ and absorption coefficient $\alpha$ can be computed using the relations from [@Jepsen2019]. The
user can select a source and a reference for the calculation.

$$n(\omega) = 1 + \frac{c \Delta\phi(\omega)}{\omega d}$$
$$\alpha(\omega) = -\frac{2}{d} \ln\left(\frac{(n+1)^2}{4n} \cdot \frac{A_{\text{sample}}(\omega)}{A_{\text{reference}}(\omega)}\right)$$

where:

- $\Delta\phi(\omega) = \phi_{\text{sample}}(\omega) - \phi_{\text{reference}}(\omega)$ is the phase difference
- $A_{\text{sample}}(\omega)$ and $A_{\text{reference}}(\omega)$ are the amplitude spectra
- $c$ is the speed of light
- $\omega = 2\pi f$ is the angular frequency
- $d$ is the sample thickness

## Interactive 3D Viewer

A THz time domain scan produces a 3D data array with dimensions $n_x \times n_y \times n_t$, where $(n_x, n_y)$
represent the spatial coordinates and $n_t$ represents the time axis.

Scans performed in reflection can be visualized in 3D. First, we transform each time trace into an intensity value by
computing
the squared amplitude and
applying a Gaussian envelope function:
$$
I(x,y,t) = |s(x,y,t)|^2 * G_{\sigma}(t)
$$

where $G_{\sigma}(t)$ is a normalized 1D Gaussian kernel with standard deviation $\sigma = 6.0$ and radius of 12
samples,
applied via convolution to smooth the squared signal and extract the envelope as shown in figure \ref{fig:envelope}.

![The convoluted envelope of the signal. All datapoints below the indicated threshold are treated as transparent. \label{fig:envelope}](convolution_example.pdf)

The time axis is converted to a spatial distance coordinate by assuming a refractive index of $n=1$ and using the
relation $z = ct/2$, where $c$ is the speed of light and the factor of 2 accounts for the round-trip propagation. This
transformation yields a three-dimensional intensity cube $I(x,y,z)$.

Each element (voxel) in this cube represents the THz signal intensity at a specific point in 3D space, enabling
visualization of reflections from internal interfaces and sub-surface structures. The computed intensities are mapped to
voxel opacity values - regions with high intensity appear opaque while low-intensity regions become transparent.

The 3D viewer is implemented using the `bevy` game engine [@bevyengine] with a custom WGSL shader, available as a separate
crate: [bevy_voxel_plot](https://github.com/hacknus/bevy_voxel_plot).

## Filtering pipeline

The filtering process is a simple linear pipeline, where the output of one filter is the input of the next filter.
Filters can be placed in specific domains, either in time domain or frequency domain:

- Time Domain Before FFT
- Frequency Band Pass Filter
- Time Domain After FFT

Band-pass filters are already implemented in the application for each domain. The band-pass filter in time domain
before FFT can be used to trim off trailing pulses.
By selecting a slice in time domain after FFT, it is possible to scan through the $z$-axis of the scan and analysing
sub-surface layers [@koch-dandolo_reflection_2015].

### Deconvolution

The deconvolution filter is an implementation of the Frequency-dependent Richardson-Lucy algorithm described
in [@demion_frequency-dependent_2025].

### Custom Filters

The code-base can easily be extended with custom filters. The user needs to create a custom file in the `src/filters`
directory with a struct that implements the `Filter` trait.

# Summary

THz Image Explorer primarily serves as a high-performance data analysis tool for THz 2D images. The main focus lies on
preliminary browsing of measurements, rough analysis of scans and identifying regions of interest in each scan. It is
designed in a modular way to allow possible implementation of more thorough analysis features in the future.

# Acknowledgements

This work was supported through a MARVIS (Multidisciplinary Advanced
Research Ventures in Space) programme of the Swiss Department for Business, Education,
and Research (SBFI) called SUBICE. SUBICE is a project of the University of Bern (UniBe),
the University of Applied Sciences and Arts, Western Switzerland (HES-SO), and Thales-Alenia Space Switzerland (TASCH).
The project has been partially funded by the European
Space Agency (ESA) under the ESA Initial Support for Innovation (EISI) program.
We acknowledge the support of the Open Space Innovation Platform (OSIP) and in
particular Nicolas Thiry and Leopold Summerer.

# References

Commit message:

add the declaration of the use of AI based tools

paper/paper.md, after:

---
title: "THz Image Explorer - An Interactive Cross-Platform Open-Source THz Image Analysis Tool"
tags:
  - THz
  - Rust
  - Imaging
  - Data Analysis
authors:
  - name: Linus Leo Stöckli
    orcid: 0000-0002-7916-2592
    corresponding: true
    affiliation: "1"
  - name: Arnaud Demion
    orcid: 0009-0002-6920-475X
    affiliation: "2"
  - name: Nicolas Thomas
    orcid: 0000-0002-0146-0071
    affiliation: "1"
affiliations:
  - name: Space Research & Planetary Sciences Division, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland
    index: 1
    ror: 02k7v4d05
  - name: University of Applied Sciences and Arts Western Switzerland Valais, HES-SO Valais-Wallis, Sion, Switzerland
    index: 2
    ror: 03r5zec51
date: 3 July 2025
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Introduction

THz time-domain spectroscopy (TDS) is a fast-growing field with applications to perform non-destructive studies of
material properties [@neu_tutorial_2018].
The pulses can either be measured after passing through (transmission spectrum) or after being reflected (reflection
spectrum) by a sample and are recorded in the time domain. Through Fourier analysis (FFT), we can investigate the
complex refractive index and absorption coefficient of the sample.
By placing either the sample or the optical setup on a moving stage the sample can be imaged in 2D.

![THz Image Explorer icon.\label{fig:icon}](icon.png){#id .class width=20%}

We developed an interactive graphical user interface (GUI), written
in [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org) [@matsakis2014rust], to aid
investigating acquired 2D scans. The
application implements the dotTHz standard [@lee_dotthz_2023] and is platform independent and open-source, thus making
it easier to maintain and increasing its reach.

![THz Image Explorer screenshot.\label{fig:screenshot}](screenshot.png)

# Statement of need

Interactive analysis tools for THz spectroscopy are essential to browse through images and analyse different regions of
interest efficiently.
Commercial suppliers provide closed-source analysis tools (e.g. [Menlo Systems](https://www.menlosystems.com)) where the
code cannot be adapted by the user, which is often essential in research environments and extends the maintainability of
the code.
Solutions published by the scientific community are not available on all platforms, are only applicable on single pixel
measurements and/or not focused on an interactive workflow [@peretti_thz-tds_2019; @loaiza_thztools_2024].
With this application, we provide a high-performance solution written in Rust, that allows an interactive analysis of 2D
THz
scans with multiple filters and a 3D viewer.
This work is open-source and pre-built bundles are available for Linux, macOS and Windows, thus available to the
entire scientific community.

# Structure

The application is multithreaded with two main threads:

- GUI thread
- Data thread

The GUI uses [egui](https://www.egui.rs), an immediate-mode GUI library for rust.

The structure of the software architecture is shown in figure \ref{fig:software-architecture}.

![Software Architecture.\label{fig:software-architecture}](thz-image-explorer.drawio.png){width=80% .center}

# Usage

A sample scan (of a resolution target) is available in the `sample_data` directory. The measurement has been acquired
using the COCoNuT setup [@coconut_2025].

## Optical Properties Calculation

The refractive index $n$ and absorption coefficient $\alpha$ can be computed using the relations from [@Jepsen2019]. The
user can select a source and a reference for the calculation.

$$n(\omega) = 1 + \frac{c \Delta\phi(\omega)}{\omega d}$$
$$\alpha(\omega) = -\frac{2}{d} \ln\left(\frac{(n+1)^2}{4n} \cdot \frac{A_{\text{sample}}(\omega)}{A_{\text{reference}}(\omega)}\right)$$

where:

- $\Delta\phi(\omega) = \phi_{\text{sample}}(\omega) - \phi_{\text{reference}}(\omega)$ is the phase difference
- $A_{\text{sample}}(\omega)$ and $A_{\text{reference}}(\omega)$ are the amplitude spectra
- $c$ is the speed of light
- $\omega = 2\pi f$ is the angular frequency
- $d$ is the sample thickness

## Interactive 3D Viewer

A THz time domain scan produces a 3D data array with dimensions $n_x \times n_y \times n_t$, where $(n_x, n_y)$
represent the spatial coordinates and $n_t$ represents the time axis.

Scans performed in reflection can be visualized in 3D. First, we transform each time trace into an intensity value by
computing
the squared amplitude and
applying a Gaussian envelope function:
$$
I(x,y,t) = |s(x,y,t)|^2 * G_{\sigma}(t)
$$

where $G_{\sigma}(t)$ is a normalized 1D Gaussian kernel with standard deviation $\sigma = 6.0$ and radius of 12
samples,
applied via convolution to smooth the squared signal and extract the envelope as shown in figure \ref{fig:envelope}.

![The convoluted envelope of the signal. All datapoints below the indicated threshold are treated as transparent. \label{fig:envelope}](convolution_example.pdf)

The time axis is converted to a spatial distance coordinate by assuming a refractive index of $n=1$ and using the
relation $z = ct/2$, where $c$ is the speed of light and the factor of 2 accounts for the round-trip propagation. This
transformation yields a three-dimensional intensity cube $I(x,y,z)$.

Each element (voxel) in this cube represents the THz signal intensity at a specific point in 3D space, enabling
visualization of reflections from internal interfaces and sub-surface structures. The computed intensities are mapped to
voxel opacity values - regions with high intensity appear opaque while low-intensity regions become transparent.

The 3D viewer is implemented using the `bevy` game engine [@bevyengine] with a custom WGSL shader, available as a
separate
crate: [bevy_voxel_plot](https://github.com/hacknus/bevy_voxel_plot).

## Filtering pipeline

The filtering process is a simple linear pipeline, where the output of one filter is the input of the next filter.
Filters can be placed in specific domains, either in time domain or frequency domain:

- Time Domain Before FFT
- Frequency Band Pass Filter
- Time Domain After FFT

Band-pass filters are already implemented in the application for each domain. The band-pass filter in time domain
before FFT can be used to trim off trailing pulses.
By selecting a slice in time domain after FFT, it is possible to scan through the $z$-axis of the scan and analysing
sub-surface layers [@koch-dandolo_reflection_2015].

### Deconvolution

The deconvolution filter is an implementation of the Frequency-dependent Richardson-Lucy algorithm described
in [@demion_frequency-dependent_2025].

### Custom Filters

The code-base can easily be extended with custom filters. The user needs to create a custom file in the `src/filters`
directory with a struct that implements the `Filter` trait.

# Summary

THz Image Explorer primarily serves as a high-performance data analysis tool for THz 2D images. The main focus lies on
preliminary browsing of measurements, rough analysis of scans and identifying regions of interest in each scan. It is
designed in a modular way to allow possible implementation of more thorough analysis features in the future.

# Declaration of the use of AI-based tools

AI-based tools, including ChatGPT and GitHub Copilot, were used to support this work.
These tools assisted with code generation but did not replace the author’s critical thinking or original contributions
in any way.
All content has been reviewed and validated by the author to ensure accuracy and integrity.

| **AI-based tool** | **Model**                                                       | **Use Case**    | **Remarks**         |
|-------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------|---------------------|
| ChatGPT           | GPT-3, GPT-4, GPT-4o, GPT-5                                     | Code generation | Rust, Python        |
| GitHub Copilot    | GPT-4o, GPT-5, Claude Sonnet 3.5, Claude Sonnet 3.7, Gemini 2.5 | Code generation | Rust, Python, Swift |

# Acknowledgements

This work was supported through a MARVIS (Multidisciplinary Advanced
Research Ventures in Space) programme of the Swiss Department for Business, Education,
and Research (SBFI) called SUBICE. SUBICE is a project of the University of Bern (UniBe),
the University of Applied Sciences and Arts, Western Switzerland (HES-SO), and Thales-Alenia Space Switzerland (TASCH).
The project has been partially funded by the European
Space Agency (ESA) under the ESA Initial Support for Innovation (EISI) program.
We acknowledge the support of the Open Space Innovation Platform (OSIP) and in
particular Nicolas Thiry and Leopold Summerer.

# References
